IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

2443

CTDI: CNN-Transformer-Based Spatial-Temporal
Missing Air Pollution Data Imputation
Yangwen Yu , Victor O. K. Li , Fellow, IEEE, Jacqueline C. K. Lam , Kelvin Chan, and Qi Zhang

Abstract—Accurate and comprehensive air pollution data
is essential for understanding and addressing environmental
challenges. Missing data can impair accurate analysis and decisionmaking. This study presents a novel approach, named CNNTransformer-based Spatial-Temporal Data Imputation (CTDI), for
imputing missing air pollution data. Data pre-processing incorporates observed air pollution data and related urban data to
produce 24-hour period tensors as input samples. 1-by-1 CNN
layers capture the interaction between different types of input
data. Deep learning transformer architecture is employed in a
spatial-temporal (S-T) transformer module to capture long-range
dependencies and extract complex relationships in both spatial and
temporal dimensions. Hong Kong air pollution data is statistically
analyzed and used to evaluate CTDI in its recovery of generated
and actual patterns of missing data. Experimental results show that
CTDI consistently outperforms existing imputation methods across
all evaluated scenarios, including cases with higher rates of missing
data, thereby demonstrating its robustness and effectiveness in enhancing air quality monitoring. Additionally, ablation experiments
reveal that each component significantly contributes to the model’s
performance, with the temporal transformer proving particularly
crucial under varying rates of missing data.
Index Terms—Air pollution, deep learning, transformer, missing
data, data imputation, data recovery, spatial-temporal.

I. INTRODUCTION
IR pollution significantly impacts human health and the
environment, especially in urban areas with high levels
of pollutants like particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide [1].
These pollutants contribute to serious health issues, particularly
affecting vulnerable groups such as children and the elderly [2],
leading to millions of premature deaths annually, as estimated
by the WHO [3]. Addressing this critical issue requires global
initiatives focused on stricter emissions standards, clean energy
promotion, and sustainable transportation [4], [5]. High-quality

A

Received 7 March 2024; revised 13 January 2025; accepted 20 January 2025.
Date of publication 27 January 2025; date of current version 4 September 2025.
This work was supported by the Theme-based Research Scheme of the Research
Grants Council of Hong Kong SAR Government under Grant T41-709/17-N.
Recommended for acceptance by P. D’Urso. (Victor O. K. Li and Jacqueline C.
K. Lam contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors: Victor O. K.
Li; Jacqueline C. K. Lam.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong (e-mail: ywyu@eee.
hku.hk; vli@eee.hku.hk; jcklam@eee.hku.hk; cjr273@hku.hk; zq666@
connect.hku.hk).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TBDATA.2025.3533882, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBDATA.2025.3533882

air quality data is essential for policymakers to identify pollution
hotspots [6] and inform targeted strategies [7], [8], and it also
enables individuals to make informed health choices [9], [10].
However, obtaining accurate and timely urban air quality data
poses challenges [11]. Monitoring stations often suffer from
missing data due to equipment malfunctions, sensor failures,
power outages, and other issues [12], [13]. Additionally, the high
costs of deploying and maintaining monitoring stations limit
their coverage in urban areas [14]. To better assess city-wide air
pollution, incorporating mobile sensors [15], [16] or developing
fine-grained pollution estimation systems [17] is necessary. Yet,
low-cost mobile sensors often lack precision, making accurate
data estimation even more crucial. Inappropriate recovery of
missing data can lead to biased analyses and ineffective interventions, highlighting the need for innovative recovery methods [18].
Recent advancements in machine learning [12], [19], [20]
and artificial intelligence [21], [22] present promising solutions
for accurately recovering missing air pollution data. The transformer architecture [23], initially designed for natural language
processing [24], [25], has proven effective in various fields, including computer vision [26] and time series analysis [27]. This
architecture utilizes a Self-Attention mechanism [28], enabling
it to focus on relevant input portions and capture long-range
dependencies, while also supporting parallelization for handling
large datasets [29].
In this study, we propose a Transformer-based data imputation
approach for recovering missing air pollution data in urban
settings. Our evaluation of this method using real-world data
from Hong Kong reveals significant improvements in modeling
spatial-temporal (S-T) correlated air pollution. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
1) Innovative CNN-Transformer Architecture: We propose
a groundbreaking approach for recovering air pollution
data, termed CNN-Transformer-based Spatial-Temporal
Data Imputation (CTDI). This novel architecture synergistically integrates Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
and Transformer models, enabling the effective capture
of intricate interactions between diverse data types while
automatically extracting spatial-temporal (S-T) features.
This dual capability enhances the model’s performance in
accurately reconstructing missing data.
2) Advanced Data Pre-processing Techniques: The new data
pre-processing strategy includes 1) the use of Inverse Distance Weighting (IDW) for spatial interpolation, allowing

2332-7790 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

for the integration of local urban data—such as meteorological conditions, wind speed, and traffic information—
into the air pollution recovery model, and 2) the application of sliding windows (SW) for temporal segmentation,
which divides the data into 24-hour period tensors with a
1-hour sliding stride to enhance the input volume.
3) Multi-Data Type Recovery: Unlike conventional data imputation methods that are limited to handling a single
type of data, CTDI can simultaneously recover multiple
types of S-T air pollution data. This is achieved through
the incorporation of 1-by-1 CNN layers that capture interactions between different data types. By preserving
the relationships between different pollutants, rather than
discarding or overlooking this information, the recovery
performance of the model is improved.
4) Pioneering S-T Transformer Module: The S-T transformer
module is a key innovation in our approach, consisting
of both spatial and temporal transformers to extract relevant features in both dimensions. This represents the
first application of transformer architecture specifically
for the recovery of missing air pollution data, marking a
significant advancement in the field.
5) Real-World Dataset Analysis: We conduct a comprehensive analysis of missing data from a real-world air pollution dataset in Hong Kong, offering valuable insights
into the nature and patterns of data losses. This empirical
evaluation not only demonstrates the effectiveness of our
model but also provides a robust foundation for further
exploration and refinement of air quality data recovery
techniques.
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section II reviews
existing data imputation approaches and motivates the use of
the transformer architecture in the recovery of air pollution
data. In Section III, the proposed CTDI model is introduced in
detail. Section IV follows with a statistical analysis of real-world
missing air pollution data in Hong Kong, an examination of the
performance of CTDI, and a discussion of the results. Finally, the
paper concludes in Section V and offers suggestions for future
research directions.
II. RELATED WORK
Existing data imputation approaches can be broadly classified into three categories: 1) Statistical imputation [30], [31],
2) Machine learning-based imputation [32], [33], [34], and
3) Deep learning-based imputation [35], [36], [37].
Statistical imputation methods primarily use statistical techniques to estimate missing values based on the observed data. A
well-known approach within this category is Multiple Imputation [38], [39]. Instead of filling in missing values with a single
estimate (such as the mean), multiple imputation creates several
different plausible datasets by imputing the missing values multiple times [40]. In contrast, shallow machine learning-based
imputation leverages traditional machine learning algorithms,
such as decision trees or k-nearest neighbors, to predict and fill
in missing values [32]. These methods typically use patterns

in the available data to infer the missing entries, optimizing
for accuracy and efficiency. While they can be effective, they
often rely on well-defined feature relationships and may struggle
with highly complex datasets compared to their deep-learning
counterparts.
A. Deep Learning Based Approaches to S-T Data Imputation
Deep learning has been fruitfully applied across various
fields [41], [42] and offers several advantages over statistical and shallow machine learning techniques [43]. First, deep
learning algorithms automatically learn features from raw data,
minimizing the need for manual feature engineering common
in statistical imputation. Second, they capture intricate patterns, allowing for better handling of nonlinear relationships
and high-dimensional feature spaces than traditional methods. Third, deep learning models exhibit excellent scalability, robustness, and transferability. Traditional deep learning
based S-T data imputation approaches can be categorized
into three types: 1) Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)based models [44], [45], 2) Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)based models [46], [47], and 3) CNN-RNN Hybrid models
[48], [49].
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are classical deep
learning models, initially designed for processing and analyzing visual data, such as images and videos [50], [51], [52],
[53]. Typical CNN-based data imputation methods include
Autoencoder-based Multiple Imputation using Denoising Autoencoders (MIDA) [35] and Graph-based Imputation Neural
Networks (GINN) [44]. MIDA imputes missing values by training a CNN-based autoencoder to learn the underlying patterns of
complete data and then uses this knowledge to generate plausible
imputations. GINN utilizes graph convolutional neural networks
to capture the complex relationships between nodes and imputes missing values based on the surrounding graph structure.
However, CNN-based methods struggle with long-range dependencies in spatial-temporal (S-T) data and are computationally
intensive, limiting their practicality for imputing S-T correlated
data.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are designed for processing sequential data, such as time series [54], text [55], and
speech [56]. They maintain a hidden state as memory, allowing
them to capture temporal dependencies and contextual information. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [57], [58]
address the vanishing gradient problem, enabling the modeling
of long-term dependencies. Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) [59]
simplify LSTMs with similar gating mechanisms. Despite their
effectiveness, RNNs have limitations with S-T data [60], [61]:
1) they struggle to capture spatial dependencies, 2) they process
data in a sequential manner, which limits their ability to utilize
parallel processing, and 3) they face memory constraints that
hinder the retention of long-term dependencies.
CNN-RNN hybrid models combine the strengths of CNNs
and RNNs for handling S-T data [62], [63]. CNNs excel at
extracting spatial features, while RNNs capture temporal dependencies. However, hybrid models are more complex, with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YU et al.: CTDI: CNN-TRANSFORMER-BASED SPATIAL-TEMPORAL MISSING AIR POLLUTION DATA IMPUTATION

2445

a larger number of parameters that increase the computational
intensity and training time [64].
B. Transformer
The transformer deep learning architecture was proposed by
Vaswani et al. in the 2017 paper ”Attention Is All You Need”
[65]. It is able to capture long-range dependencies and achieve
state-of-the-art results in tasks such as machine translation,
text generation, sentiment analysis, and more [24], [26], [66].
Unlike traditional sequential models, such as recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) or convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
the transformer relies on a Self-Attention mechanism [67] to
process input sequences. The Self-Attention mechanism allows
the model to weigh the importance of different positions within
the input sequence, enabling it to focus on relevant information
and disregard irrelevant or redundant parts. This gives the transformer its power and flexibility and, by resolving the issues of
vanishing and exploding gradients associated with RNNs, also
greatly improves the modelling of long-range dependencies.
Furthermore, transformer models can be trained in parallel,
making them much quicker to train than sequential models.
This parallelization results from the Self-Attention mechanism’s
ability to process input sequences in parallel, eliminating the
sequential bottleneck present in traditional models. Additionally, Multi-Head Attention [68] allows the transformer model
to jointly attend to information from different representation
subspaces at different positions. This enhanced expressivity
helps the model extract more subtle and complex feature patterns
in the data.
The transformer architecture has been widely adopted and
extended since its introduction. Variants such as BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) [69], GPT
(Generative Pre-trained Transformer) [70], and T5 (Text-to-Text
Transfer Transformer) [71] have achieved remarkable results on
a wide range of NLP tasks. The Transformer’s impact extends
beyond NLP, as researchers have also applied it to computer
vision, speech recognition, and other domains. Regarding S-T
data studies, Mingxing Xu et al. have successfully combined
GCN and Transformer structure to forecast traffic flow [72].
Weibin Zhang et al. have incorporated Self-Attention into a
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) to repair missing data
for traffic flow [73]. Qiaolin Zeng et al. have combined a data
decomposition strategy with transformer network to predict
the PM2.5 time-series [74]. Given the exceptional performance
demonstrated by the transformer in these studies, we have compelling evidence to support its efficacy as a potent solution for
addressing missing air pollution data.
III. METHODOLOGY
In this study, we propose CTDI (CNN-Transformer-based
Data Imputation), which is a deep learning framework that
combines CNN and transformer architectures to recover missing
air pollution measurements. This is shown schematically in
Fig. 1. CTDI consists of three components: a data pre-processing
component, a 1 × 1 convolutional component, and an S-T
Transformer module. The remainder of this section describes

Fig. 1.

Overall framework of CTDI.

the design of each component in detail followed by the loss
function.
A. Data Pre-Processing Component
Certain urban factors, such as wind speed and traffic information, may not be in the immediate vicinity of the air quality
stations yet still affect air pollution. To incorporate these features
into the CTDI framework, the data pre-processing component
employs a spatial interpolation mechanism to map these features
to each air pollution monitoring station. Specifically, Inverse
Distance Weighting (IDW) is used with a squared weighting
function [75]. The formula is as follows:
 N
i=1 wij ui

d(i, j) = 0
N
,
(1)
uj =
i=1 wij
d(i, j) = 0
ui
where ui denotes the raw urban data at the i location, and uj
denotes the mapped urban data at the j location at which an
1
air quality monitoring station is situated. wij = d(i,j)
p is the
inverse distance weight of the data and p = 2. By assigning
higher weights to nearby locations and lower weights to more
distant locations, the squared weighting function increases the
effect of urban features closer to a particular monitoring station.
After spatial interpolation, the dataset available for imputation
contains air pollution data and mapped urban data. This can be
regarded as a large 3-dimensional tensor. Let X raw ∈ Rs×t×c
denote this raw data tensor, where s denotes spatial features (i.e.
individual monitoring stations); t denotes the temporal features
(i.e. time of measurement); and c represents the number of data
categories, and is comprised of c = c1 + c2 , i.e., c1 kinds of air
pollutants and Ac2 kinds of urban factors.
The raw data tensor is then sliced into multiple 24-hour
tensor samples, which will form the inputs for data recovery by
the model. This temporal segmentation is done using a sliding
window technique similar to that used in RNN-based prediction
models [76], in which a data point is predicted based on a finite
set of previous data points within the dataset. As depicted in
Fig. 2, a sliding window of fixed size 24 in the time dimension is
used to extract the 24-hour tensor X ∈ Rs×td ×c , where td = 24
(i.e., one 24-hour period). A sliding stride of 1 h then moves the
window in 1-hour increments to generate new 24-hour tensors.
Utilizing sliding windows along the time axis increases the
number of 24-hour tensor samples, which increases the size of
the training dataset. As stability and potentially also the accuracy
of deep learning methods improve as the size of the training
dataset increases [37], this improves the performance of CTDI.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2446

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 3.

1-by-1 CNN Layer before Transformer module.

Fig. 4.

1-by-1 CNN Layer after Transformer module.

Fig. 5.

S-T Transformer Module.

Sliding window for temporal segmentation.

Additionally, some entries in the 24-hour data tensor X
are erased to imitate missing air pollution data. This is done
using a mask. Let M ∈ Rs×td ×c be the binary mask tensor,
corresponding to the distribution of the missing entries in the
24-hour tensor sample. The formal definition of M is as follows:

1 X(i, j, k) is observed
M (i, j, k) =
,
(2)
0 X(i, j, k) is missing
where (i, j, k) represents the index of individual entry in X or
M .As our focus is on recovering missing air pollution data,
the missing entries are restricted to air pollution features. Let
 denote entry-wise multiplication. Then X  M is a 24-hour
tensor sample that is incomplete (in the sense that it is missing
air pollution data) and has had each missing data entry assigned
as 0.
B. 1-By-1 CNN Layers
After data pre-processing, a single 1-by-1 CNN layer is introduced before and after the transformer module to capture
interactions between different data types. 1-by-1 convolutions,
also known as point-wise convolutions, make the model richer
by enabling non-linear feature transformations and control the
size of the tensor by adjusting the number of channels [77], [78].
In the tensor X ∈ Rs×td ×c , different types of data (such
as PM2.5 measurements and temperature) are each allocated
to a specific channel within the tensor. The utilization of 1x1
convolutions followed by the application of non-linear activation
functions, such as ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit), after the 1x1
convolutions allow the model to learn complex interactions
between input features. Importantly, this includes interactions
between different types of data since information from different
channels is combined, so the model is able to better attend to relevant features and to generate more expressive representations.
This non-linear feature transformation significantly enhances
the network’s modelling flexibility.
As shown in Fig. 3, by utilizing f 1-by-1 convolution filters of
size 1 × 1 × c, the number of channels in the incomplete 24-hour
data tensor is transformed from c to f . After the transformer
module, c 1-by-1 convolution filters are employed to construct
an output data tensor with the same dimensions as the input
24-hour data tensor X ∈ Rs×td ×c , as depicted in Fig. 4. As

1-by-1 CNN layers conserve the spatial and temporal shape of
the input tensor, positional relationships are preserved.
C. S-T Transformer Module
The S-T transformer module aims to capture the spatial and
temporal relationships of the input tensor X in ∈ Rs×td ×f generated by the 1x1 CNN layer. As shown in Fig. 5, this module
consists of two Transformer units, namely one spatial transformer and one temporal transformer. Each transformer module
is comprised of the following components: 1) one Positional
Embedding layer, which assigns unique embeddings to each position in the input sequence. 2) one Multi-Head Attention layer,
which processes multiple Self-Attention calculations (scaled
dot-product attention) in parallel to extract features from the
input sequence. 3) two Add & Norm layers, in which the Add
step comprises a residual connection to address the vanishing
gradient problem and the Norm step comprises layer normalization. 4) one Feed Forward layer, which is a position-wise
transformation to enhance the feature extraction by introducing
non-linearity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YU et al.: CTDI: CNN-TRANSFORMER-BASED SPATIAL-TEMPORAL MISSING AIR POLLUTION DATA IMPUTATION

We now describe how an input sequence is processed. The
input data tensor X in ∈ Rs×td ×f can be regarded as a set
of time-series data from s stations and denoted as X in =
{x1 , x2 , . . ., xs }, where xi ∈ Rtd ×f represents a 24-hour period
of data from the ith station. The spatial transformer transforms
this station based sequence into Y = {y1 , y2 , . . ., ys }, where
yi ∈ Rtd ×f and Y ∈ Rs×td ×f . Next, Y ∈ Rs×td ×f is transposed to Y T ∈ Rtd ×s×f , where the sequence Y T can be denoted as Y T = {y 1 , y 2 , . . ., y td } and y j ∈ Rs×f represents the
air quality-related data for all s stations in the jth hour of a given
24-hour period. The temporal transformer then outputs Z =
{z 1 , z 2 , . . ., z td }, where z j ∈ Rs×f and Z ∈ Rtd ×s×f . Finally,
the output data tensor Z is transposed to give X out ∈ Rs×td ×f ,
i.e., X out = Z T .
In the original transformer model, Vaswani et al. [65] apply
positional encoding to represent the order of the sequence in the
positional embedding layer and utilize Multi-Head Attention to
capture different types of dependencies and to attend to relevant
information across various positions of the input sequence simultaneously. The proposed CTDI follows Vaswani et al. in the
configuration of positional encoding and Multi-Head Attention
in spatial and temporal transformers. The specific configurations
are detailed in Appendix A, available online.
Additionally, each component of the CTDI model, described
in Sections III-B and III-C, has been thoroughly analyzed in the
ablation study detailed in Appendix B, available online. This
comprehensive examination reveals the distinct contributions
and impacts of each component on the overall performance
of the proposed model, providing critical insights into their
significance and effectiveness.

2447

Loss, is introduced:
Lre (X, M ) = M  ((X − C(M  X)))22


= M  (X − X )22 ,

(5)
(6)

where M ensures all the observed entries are assigned to 1.
Equation (5) represents the differences between the real observed values and the reconstructed values. By minimizing this
term, the accuracy of individual observations in the reconstructed 24-hour data tensor can be preserved. Similar to the
accumulated loss used in [79], the Reconstruction Loss can improve the accuracy of the reconstructed matrix and convergence
speed. However, in practice, the loss function Lre is much larger
than Lim , so to avoid Lre dominating the direction of the loss
function’s gradient descent, a scaling factor is used to adjust the
relative size of these two loss terms. Through trial and error, the
CTDI model was calibrated to α = 1000 and β = 1.
L(X, M ) = αLim (X, M ) + βLre (X, M )

(7)

By minimizing L(X, M ), the CTDI model can be trained for
accurate missing data recovery.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP
To evaluate the recovery performance of the proposed CTDI
model, a series of simulations were conducted. This section
begins by introducing the dataset used and analyzing its patterns
of missing data. Next, performance metrics for the proposed
model and comparison baselines are presented. Finally, simulation results for different cases of missing data are evaluated and
discussed.

D. Loss Function
We now turn to discuss the loss function of this model. As defined in previous sections, X ∈ Rs×td ×c represents the ground
truth 24-hour data tensor. M ∈ Rs×td ×c is the corresponding
binary mask tensor, in which the observed entry is assigned 1
and the missing entry is 0. Let C(·) denote the mathematical
formulation of our CTDI network. Given an incomplete matrix
M  X as the input, the network generates an estimated 24hour data tensor X  ∈ Rs×td ×c in the form of C(M  X)).
To improve the accuracy of the air pollution data recovery,
a coupled loss function is incorporated into the CTDI model.
The first term is the Imputation Loss, Lim , which captures the
difference between the ground truth and the estimated values of
the missing entries in the 24-hour data tensor. Mathematically,
this is expressed in (3) below:
Lim (X, M ) = (1 − M )  (X − C(M  X))22
= (1 − M )  (X − X  )22 ,

(3)
(4)

where (1 − M ) makes the missing entries equal to 1 and  · 22
represents the square of the euclidean distance of the missing entries in the tensor. However, Lim reflects the average imputation
error of all missing entries but not the entry-wise imputation
precision, which also affects the validity of the reconstructed
matrix. Accordingly, a further loss term, Lre Reconstruction

A. Datasets
The dataset used was obtained from three online Hong Kong
databases, namely the Hong Kong Environmental Protection
Agency (HKEPD) Database [80], Hong Kong Observatory Open
Database [81], and Hong Kong Traffic Speed Map (City Dashboard Version) Database [82]. As shown in Table I, the dataset
contains: 1) five types of air pollutants, 2) six types of meteorology data, and 3) two types of traffic data. The number of data
nodes1 and frequency of data update are also shown. The data
retrieved was from 2019-01-01 to 2021-12-31. To standardize
the frequency of each type of data to one hour (for consistency
with the air pollution data), data updated more than once per
hour was averaged over the hour.
After spatial interpolation, the size of the original data tensor s × t × c = 16 × 26304 × 13. The original dataset hence
consists of 5,471,232 items in total. Next, we used a random
80/10/10 split of the raw dataset as the training set, the validation
set, and the test set. The raw data in each set was then divided into
multiple 24-hour period data tensor samples, using a temporal
sliding window to augment the data.

1 Air pollution data from two new air pollution monitoring stations in Hong
Kong are not included for data consistency.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

TABLE I
HONG KONG DATASET COLLECTED FROM 2019-01-01 TO 2021-12-31

Fig. 6.

HK hourly missing air pollution data in different years.

Fig. 7.

Proportion of hourly missing data in the total missing data.

Fig. 8.

Proportion of different pollutants in the total missing data.

B. Missing Data Patterns Analysis and Design
A detailed statistical analysis was first conducted to characterize the missing air pollution data. The air pollution measurements cover 5 types of air pollutants from 16 Hong Kong
monitoring stations. There are 55,875 missing data items,
which corresponds to an arithmetic mean missing data rate of
2.46%. However, the rates of missing data within any given
24-hour period are diverse and the highest rate of missing data
exceeds 50%.
Fig. 6 displays the distribution of missing data by hour in
different years. There is some variation in amplitude, notably
between 2:00 am and 5:00 am, but the shape of the hourly
missing data curves is broadly similar across the different years.
Missing data is particularly pronounced at 1:00 am, 4:00 am,
and 12:00 pm. Additionally, there is more missing data in the
early morning and around noon than in other periods. Fig. 7
shows the proportion of missing data by hour in the total air
pollution dataset. One potential reason for this non-uniform
distribution may be scheduled downtime for maintenance and
inspection. Additionally, it may be more difficult to resolve
unscheduled interruptions (for example device faults, network
problems, communication interruptions, and power failures) in
a timely manner at certain hours.
As depicted in Fig. 8, the proportion of missing data by
air pollutant is much more uniformly distributed. Looking at

missing data rates for each pollutant through time, NO2 , O3 , and
SO2 have similarly shaped distributions that occur at the same
times, as do PM2.5 and PM10 . We hypothesize that this may
be caused by a single device measuring different air pollutants,
so a problem with the device affects the measurements of all
those pollutants simultaneously. Fig. 9 shows the proportion of
missing data at different monitoring stations and lies between
missing data by hour and by air pollutant in terms of uniformity.
Following the above investigation, data masks to simulate
missing data were created. In the first four cases, the entries
that were erased were randomly chosen, subject to case-specific

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YU et al.: CTDI: CNN-TRANSFORMER-BASED SPATIAL-TEMPORAL MISSING AIR POLLUTION DATA IMPUTATION

2449

opposed to discontinuous or sporadic).2 Case 5 comprises four
masks sampled from actual data. Mask 1, with a missing data
rate of 2.29%, was randomly chosen from the most common
interval (2–4%). Mask 2, with a missing data rate of 5.47%,
was randomly chosen from the second most common interval
(4–6%). Mask 3 and Mask 4, with respective missing data rates
of 12.08% and 23.13%, were randomly chosen from the two
intervals with the most severe missing data.
C. Simulation Configuration

Fig. 9.
data.

Proportion of missing data from different stations in the total missing

Fig. 10. Four missing data mask patterns with different missing rates sampled
from real-life daily missing data from 2016 to 2018.

constraints. Multiple masks were generated for each missing
data rate.
We began by investigating the general performance of the
model across a range of missing data rates:
Case 1: Low missing data rates of 2%, 4%, 6%, 8%, and 10%
within any given 24-hour period.
Case 2: High missing data rates of 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, and
60% within any given 24-hour period.
Next, we proceeded to examine the performance of the model
in recovering missing data calibrated to our real-world dataset:
Case 3: Missing data rate of 2.46% across the total dataset
(i.e. same average missing data rate as real-world total dataset).
Additionally, the proportions of missing data by hour, pollutant,
and monitoring station were controlled to be as characterized in
the pie charts.
Case 4: Missing data rate of 24.60% within any given 24-hour
period. Additionally, the proportions of missing data by hour,
pollutant, and monitoring different station were controlled to be
as characterized in the pie charts.
Lastly, we tested the effectiveness of the model in practice
by using it to recover missing data for masks that reproduced
actual missing data patterns from the real-world dataset. Fig. 10
shows the frequency of different proportions of missing data
within a 24-hour period. Further examination showed that the
majority of missing items across all patterns are consecutive (as

The proposed CTDI model was evaluated against existing data
imputation approaches (see Section II). Nine baseline models
were utilized, including 1) Mean Imputation and Multivariate
Imputation by Chained Equations (MICE), two traditional statistical imputation approaches [83], [84]; 2) K-nearest neighbors (KNN) and Miss Random Forest (MissForest), which are
machine learning-based imputation methods; 3) MIDA, LSTM,
and GINN, which represent deep learning-based imputation
techniques; and 4) two advanced methods that we previously
proposed, namely, Optimization-based Singular Value Thresholding (SVT) [12], specifically designed for short-term data
interpolation, and the state-of-the-art GCN-based S-T missing
pattern identification and recovery (GCN-ST-MDIR, simplified
in this paper as GSTR) method [11], which adaptively assigns the
Long-Short Term Context Encoder (LSCE) [37] and Improved
Long-Short Term Context Encoder (ILSCE) [13] to recover
different missing data patterns. The batch size and learning rate
for the deep learning-based baseline models and CTDI were set
to 32 and 0.002, respectively. The max epoch for CTDI was set to
100. The optimal epoch of the training process is reached when
the validation error takes its optimal value within the maximum
epoch.
To evaluate the recovery accuracy of the proposed method,
mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) was used as the performance metric. MAPE [17] is a classical statistical metric
to assess the accuracy of forecasting or prediction models and
is widely used in various fields, such as economics, finance,
and supply chain management. For the missing data recovery
task, MAPE measured the average percentage deviation between
recovered and actual values as follows:

n 
1   X m (i, j, k) − X m (i, j, k) 
MAPE =
 × 100% (8)

n
X m (i, j, k)
i=1

where X m (i, j, k) is the missing data entry, of which the binary
mask value is equal to 0, i.e., M m (i, j, k) = 0. X m (i, j, k)
represents its corresponding recovered value generated by CTDI
model. n is the total number of missing air pollution data in the
incomplete 24-hour tensor X  M .
2 Consecutive missing data contains four kinds of missing data: (1) Temporal
consecutive: the data are lost for a period of time; (2) Spatial consecutive: the
data are lost in different stations simultaneously; (3) Pollutants consecutive:
the data of different pollutants are lost simultaneously at the same station in
the same period; (4) Mixed consecutive: the most commonly missing case which
mixes the first three categories of consecutive missing together. At the same time,
sporadic loss represents occasional data loss, which is different from the above
consecutive loss.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

TABLE II
DATA RECOVERY COMPARISON FOR CASE 1

TABLE III
DATA RECOVERY COMPARISON FOR CASE 2

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. CTDI Performance in Case 1 and Case 2
We first compare the data recovery performance of CTDI
against the nine baseline models across a range of missing data
rates for Case 1, comprising scenarios with low rates of missing
data, and Case 2, comprising scenarios with high rates of missing
data.
As illustrated in Tables II and III, recovery errors for all imputation methods increase as the missing data rates rise. Compared
with traditional statistical and shallow machine learning-based
imputation methods, deep learning-based methods are both more
accurate and deteriorate by less as missing data increases. Significant performance differences among the various imputation
methods can be seen at different missing data rates.
Specifically, Mean Imputation performs the worst in both
Cases, showing a substantial increase in MAPE values as the
missing rate rises, reaching 60.79% at a 60% missing rate. MICE
shows slightly better performance at lower missing rates but
similarly struggles at higher rates. KNN and MissForest exhibit
slightly better results but are limited by strict data distribution assumptions, which hinder their effectiveness in spatial-temporal
data recovery. Among deep learning methods, MIDA and LSTM
show some improvement but still fall short compared to GINN.
The GINN model benefits from graph construction, allowing it
to consider the relevance of different data nodes, significantly
enhancing recovery accuracy. SVT performs well in low-rate
missing data interpolation but does not stand out at higher
missing rates. GSTR demonstrates good adaptability in handling
spatial-temporal missing patterns, showing marked improvement over traditional methods, especially at higher missing rates.
The combination of graph-based modelling and adaptive context
encoding strategies contributes to GSTR’s superior performance
in data recovery compared to GINN, MIDA, and LSTM.
Our CTDI model consistently outperforms all other methods
across both cases. In Case 1, CTDI achieves a MAPE of only
14.06% at a 10% missing rate, while in Case 2, it reaches
a MAPE of 18.57% at a 60% missing rate. The exceptional

performance of CTDI can be attributed to its transformer architecture, which effectively captures sequential dependencies
and spatial-temporal relationships, resulting in superior data
recovery capabilities. The ability to focus on specific parts of the
input data through the attention mechanism allows Transformers
to capture complex relationships and interactions that may be
missed by CNNs, which focus on local features, or by GCNs,
which depend on graph structures. Meanwhile, unlike sequential
computations of LSTM and GSTR, CTDI leverages parallel
computation, significantly enhancing optimization efficiency,
particularly in scenarios with high missing data.
B. CTDI Performance in Case 3-5
Case 3 and Case 4 calibrate the generated missing data masks
to the data actually missing from the real-world air pollution
dataset observed in Hong Kong. Both cases control the proportion of missing data by hour of day, pollutant, and monitoring
station to be the same as the observed dataset. Case 3 additionally
constrains the rate of missing data rate to be 2.46% across the
total dataset, which corresponds to the overall missing data rate
in the full observed 3-year air pollution dataset, while Case 4
constrains the rate of missing data to be 24.60% within any given
24-hour period to test performance under much more severe data
loss.
Table IV presents the recovery performance of the CTDI
and baseline models. Again, CTDI significantly outperforms the
other models. Tables V and VI break down the recovery error of
CTDI in Case 3 and Case 4. Table V presents the recovery error
of CTDI by air pollutants. It can be seen that the recovery of
SO2 and O3 data is more difficult than that of NO2 , PM2.5 , and
PM10 , since the recovery errors are higher despite the proportion
of missing data by pollutant being nearly uniform. This may be
due to varying feature correlations between different types of
data. The 1-by-1 CNN layer captures interactions between air
pollution data and urban data, comprised of traffic conditions
and meteorological data. Traffic conditions may be particularly
relevant for NO2 , PM2.5 , and PM10 as vehicular emissions and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YU et al.: CTDI: CNN-TRANSFORMER-BASED SPATIAL-TEMPORAL MISSING AIR POLLUTION DATA IMPUTATION

2451

TABLE IV
DATA RECOVERY COMPARISON FOR CASE 3 AND CASE4

TABLE V
CTDI ACCURACY OF RECOVERING DIFFERENT AIR POLLUTANTS
FOR CASE 3 AND CASE4

tire/road wear are key sources of NOx and urban particulate
matter. Meteorological conditions may be more important for
O3 and SO2 , since O3 is typically formed by photochemical reactions between NOx and volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
in the presence of sunlight and SO2 is typically generated by the
burning of fossil fuels (including by power stations and ships).
Table VI presents the recovery performance of CTDI by hour
of day. The five hours with the highest MAPE are shown in
bold. The recovery accuracy of CTDI decreases as the number
of missing entries increases, hence for our real-world dataset in
which there is more missing data in the early morning and noon
periods, it is more difficult to impute the data that is missing in
these periods than other times of the day.
Case 5 evaluates the data recovery performance of CTDI for
four masks that each replicate different real-world missing air
pollution patterns. The results are shown in Table VII. As in
Cases 1–4, the proposed CTDI method consistently outperforms
all other baseline approaches. The out-performance of CTDI
with real-world data loss and the consistency of CTDI’s outperformance across multiple different scenarios strongly suggest
that CTDI can be usefully deployed in the real-world and improve the recovery accuracy of missing air pollution data.
C. Test for Different Datasets
The selection of datasets for missing data imputation has
been shown in previous work [11], [37] to be important for
the performance of deep learning models. In this section, we
evaluate the performance of the proposed CTDI method using
two different datasets. The first dataset, as previously described,
comprises five types of air pollutants, six types of meteorology
data, and two types of traffic data. For convenience, we will refer
to this dataset as “AU” for air pollution data and urban data. The
second dataset includes only the five types of air pollutants and
will be referred to as dataset “A”.
Table VIII presents the performance of CTDI for the two
datasets. The performance of CTDI for the “AU” dataset and
the “A” dataset are similar, but data recovery for the “A” dataset
is generally being slightly better than for the “AU” dataset. Although data on traffic and other urban factors may be important
for forecasting air pollution, the results indicate that a dataset
comprised of only air pollution measurements is sufficient for

CTDI to recover missing data in this Hong Kong case study.
We believe that the information contained in multiple types of
observed air pollutants before, during, and after the timestamp
are enough to reconstruct the loss [11] because: 1) The observed
air pollution measurements (including observations from nearby
monitoring stations) already incorporate the impact of urban
factors. 2) In the Hong Kong dataset, the urban factors occur
at locations different to those of the air pollution monitoring
stations. While spatial interpolation was employed to align the
urban factors with the air pollution measurements from the
monitoring stations, the resulting accuracy of the urban data
for each station is insufficient to add new information to that
already contained in the air pollution data.
However, incorporating urban data does have a positive effect
by expanding the tensor size of the 24-hour period input data.
Similar to the idea of batch size [85], this enlarged input size
facilitates faster convergence of the proposed CTDI model. As a
result, for each missing data mask, the optimal number of epochs
for CTDI to converge is fewer for the “AU” dataset than for the
“A” dataset.
D. Discussion of CTDI Performance
The experimental results in Sections V-A–V-C lead to the
following conclusions: 1) The proposed CTDI approach outperforms all the baseline models – including statistical imputations, shallow machine learning-based imputations, traditional
deep learning-based imputations, and our previously proposed
state-of-the-art approaches – regardless of the pattern of missing
data (whether generated or taken from the real-world); 2) The
recovery accuracy of CTDI decreases as the rate of missing
data increases. All data recovery models are adversely affected
by fewer observations from which to recover the missing data,
since the information content is reduced. Additionally, a higher
rate of missing data tends to reflect a higher proportion of
consecutively missing data and previous work has shown that
recovery of consecutively missing data is more difficult than that
of sporadic missing data [13], [37]. The relative outperformance
of CTDI as missing data rates increase and recovery becomes
more challenging also suggests that CTDI improves on existing
methods.
We attribute CTDI’s superior performance to its transformer
architecture, especially the Self-Attention mechanism. To explore this, Figs. 11–14 show the internal correlations of the
air pollution data, calculated by aggregating and averaging the
raw air pollution measurements into one 24-hour period and
then using the Pearson correlation coefficient [86] to calculate
the similarities between the averaged data. The value of this
correlation coefficient is in the range of [0, 1] and a larger
coefficient value indicates a higher correlation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

TABLE VI
CTDI ACCURACY FOR RECOVERING MISSING DATA AT DIFFERENT TIMES FOR CASE 3 AND CASE4

TABLE VII
DATA RECOVERY COMPARISON FOR CASE 5

TABLE VIII
DATA RECOVERY COMPARISON BETWEEN AU AND A

Fig. 12. Data correlation from different stations in the average daily air
pollution data.

Fig. 11.

Hourly data correlation in the average daily air pollution data.

Fig. 11 presents the correlation between air pollutant levels
for different hours of the day. The correlations between commuting hours in the morning and afternoon and the correlations
between early morning sleeping hours are extremely high (high

Fig. 13.

HK air pollution data monitoring stations.

correlations are shown in red). Since the Self-Attention mechanism weighs the importance of all the positions within the
input sequence and allows the model to update its weightings
based on all relevant positions, irrespective of the distance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YU et al.: CTDI: CNN-TRANSFORMER-BASED SPATIAL-TEMPORAL MISSING AIR POLLUTION DATA IMPUTATION

Fig. 14. Data correlation from different pollutants in the average daily air
pollution data.

between the target position and those positions relevant to it,
the Transformer-based CTDI model is able to better capture
the temporal relationships present in time-series air qualityrelated data than CNN, which convolutes only on local neighbors, and RNN, which finds it difficult to capture long-term
dependencies.
Similarly, Fig. 12 shows the correlation between different
monitoring stations. The geographic locations of these stations
are illustrated in Fig. 13. Monitoring stations that are located
close to each other (such as Mong Kok and Sham Shui Po)
have high correlations. Additionally, monitoring stations that are
situated relatively far apart may still have high correlations, for
example, city centers (such as Causeway Bay, Central, and Mong
Kok), and lower activity areas (such as Sha Tin, Tap Mun, and
Yuen Long); we hypothesize this is because their environments
share similar characteristics, such as usage (shaping human
activity and, in turn, pollution generation) and physical characteristics, such as street canyons and building density (shaping
pollution propagation and concentration/dispersion). Through
its attention mechanism, the Transformer-based CTDI model
is able to capture spatial relationships in the inputs between
adjacent and non-adjacent stations much more effectively than
CNN, GCN, and RNN.
Finally, Fig. 14 shows the correlation between the different
air pollutants. The 1-by-1 CNN layer allows the CTDI model to
capture the relationships between different types of data features
and hence improve accuracy by using information from other
pollutants to recover the missing data of a particular pollutant.
The combination of these features enables CTDI to consistently
outperform other approaches, regardless of the particular pattern
of missing data to be recovered.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study proposes a CNN-Transformer-based data imputation model named CTDI for the recovery of missing air pollution
data. The model consists of three components. First, within
the data pre-processing component, IDW is utilized to spatially
interpolate air pollution data and related urban factors. A sliding
window strategy is then employed to temporal segment the

2453

data; this augments the dataset to provide the model with more
24-hour period data tensors from which to learn.
Second, a 1-by-1 convolution layer is employed after the
data pre-processing component. This layer transforms of the
depth of the 24-hour period data tensor and enables the model
to capture the relationship and interactions between different
types of data features. At the same time, this 1×1 CNN layer
preserves the height and width of the data, ensuring the retention
of the inherent spatial and temporal relationships between data
entries situated in the S-T positions within the 24-hour period
data tensor.
Third, the S-T Transformer module is specifically designed to
capture the spatial and temporal relationships within the 24-hour
period data tensor. The module achieves this effectively by
transposing the input tensor into spatial and temporal sequences
and then utilizing the powerful feature extraction capability of
the Multi-Head Attention architecture. Additionally, the loss
function of CTDI penalizes both entry-wise imputation error
and overall average error to maximize the recovery of the reconstructed matrix.
Finally, we have also investigated the statistical characteristics of a Hong Kong air pollution dataset collected over 3
years. We found that the missing data rate across the full-time
period is 2.46% and that the missing data is non-uniformly
distributed. In particular, there is pronounced periodicity, with
most missing data entries occurring in the early morning and
noon periods. According to the investigation results, we then
used a variety of patterns of missing data to evaluate CTDI.
Simulation results show that CTDI outperforms baselines (including statistical imputation, shallow machine learning-based
methods, conventional deep learning techniques, and two advanced recovery approaches we previously proposed.) in all
scenarios. In addition, experiments on different datasets indicated that the air pollution observations alone are sufficient
for the recovery of air pollution measurements in the case of
Hong Kong. Furthermore, our ablation experiments indicate
that each component makes a significant contribution to overall
performance of CTDI, particularly highlighting the importance
of the temporal transformer in scenarios with varying rates of
missing data.
One direction of future research is to investigate the applicability and performance of CTDI in recovering air pollution data
in other cities. In cities where meteorology data and traffic data
are measured at the same sites as pollution monitoring stations,
incorporating these urban factors may play a more significant
role in the imputation of air pollutants than in the Hong Kong
case.
In addition to air pollution data collected from air quality
monitoring stations, the proposed CTDI model can also be
directly applied to impute measurements from mobile air pollution sensors. The data from these sensors also exhibit complex spatial-temporal correlations and possess internal feature
relevance, making them suitable for CTDI-based imputation.
Moreover, we believe this could potentially be extended to other
systems with similar characteristics, such as power systems and
traffic flow, further expanding the applicability and usefulness
of the CTDI model.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Environmental Protection Department of the Hong Kong SAR Government, for
providing valuable online open data source. The authors would
also like to thank Dr. Yang Han, Department of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering, the University of Hong Kong (HKU),
for providing the urban dataset he has downloaded. All errors
rest entirely on the authors.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Liu et al., “Association between exposure to ambient particulate matter
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Results from a cross-sectional
study in China,” Thorax, vol. 72, no. 9, pp. 788–795, 2017.
[2] J. M. Balbus and C. Malina, “Identifying vulnerable subpopulations for
climate change health effects in the United States,” J. Occup. Environ.
Med., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 33–37, 2009.
[3] “WHO Health Topic: Air pollution,” Accessed: Mar. 01, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.who.int/health-topics/air-pollution
[4] I. Yuksel and K. Kaygusuz, “Renewable energy sources for clean and
sustainable energy policies in Turkey,” Renewable Sustain. Energy Rev.,
vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 4132–4144, 2011.
[5] Y. Han, V. O. K. Li, J. C. K. Lam, and M. Pollitt, “How blue is the sky? estimating air qualities in Beijing during the blue sky day period (2008–2012)
by Bayesian multi-task LSTM,” Environ. Sci. Policy, vol. 116, pp. 69–77,
2021.
[6] C. K. Gately, L. R. Hutyra, S. Peterson, and I. S. Wing, “Urban emissions
hotspots: Quantifying vehicle congestion and air pollution using mobile
phone GPS data,” Environ. Pollut., vol. 229, pp. 496–504, 2017.
[7] X. Xie et al., “A review of urban air pollution monitoring and exposure
assessment methods,” ISPRS Int. J. Geo- Inf., vol. 6, no. 12, 2017,
Art. no. 389.
[8] Y. Ma, M. Richards, M. Ghanem, Y. Guo, and J. Hassard, “Air pollution
monitoring and mining based on sensor grid in London,” Sensors, vol. 8,
no. 6, pp. 3601–3623, 2008.
[9] M. Brauer et al., “Ambient air pollution exposure estimation for the global
burden of disease 2013,” Environ. Sci. Technol., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 79–88,
2016.
[10] B. Zou, J. G. Wilson, F. B. Zhan, and Y. Zeng, “Air pollution exposure assessment methods utilized in epidemiological studies,” J. Environ. Monit.,
vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 475–490, 2009.
[11] Y. Yu, V. O. K. Li, J. C. K. Lam, and K. Chan, “GCN-ST-MDIR: Graph
convolutional network-based spatial-temporal missing air pollution data
pattern identification and recovery,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 1347–1364, Oct. 2023.
[12] Y. Yu, J. J. Q. Yu, V. O. K. Li, and J. C. K. Lam, “Low-rank singular value
thresholding for recovering missing air quality data,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Big Data, 2017, pp. 508–513.
[13] Y. Yu, V. O. K. Li, and J. C. K. Lam, “Hierarchical recovery of missing
air pollution data via improved long-short term context encoder network,”
IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 93–105, Feb. 2023.
[14] C. Sun, V. O. K. Li, J. C. K. Lam, and I. Leslie, “Optimal citizen-centric
sensor placement for air quality monitoring: A case study of city of
Cambridge, the United Kingdom,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 47390–47400,
2019.
[15] A. Boubrima, W. Bechkit, and H. Rivano, “Optimal WSN deployment
models for air pollution monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 2723–2735, May 2017.
[16] Y. Han, S. Song, Y. Yu, J. C. K. Lam, and V. O. K. Li, “UNI-CAL: A
universal AI-driven model for air pollutant sensor calibration with domainspecific knowledge inputs,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 126531–126544,
2024.
[17] Q. Zhang, Y. Han, V. O. K. Li, and J. C. Lam, “Deep-air: A hybrid
CNN-LSTM framework for fine-grained air pollution estimation and
forecast in metropolitan cities,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 55818–55841,
2022.
[18] L. M. Rivera-Muñoz, J. D. Gallego-Villada, A. F. Giraldo-Forero, and J. D.
Martinez-Vargas, “Missing data estimation in a low-cost sensor network
for measuring air quality: A case study in Aburrá Valley,” Water, Air, Soil
Pollut., vol. 232, pp. 1–15, 2021.

[19] J. M. Jerez et al., “Missing data imputation using statistical and machine
learning methods in a real breast cancer problem,” Artif. Intell. Med.,
vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 105–115, 2010.
[20] Y. Yu, J. J. Q. Yu, V. O. K. Li, and J. C. K. Lam, “A novel Interpolation-SVT
approach for recovering missing low-rank air quality data,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 74291–74305, 2020.
[21] X. Chai, H. Gu, F. Li, H. Duan, X. Hu, and K. Lin, “Deep learning for
irregularly and regularly missing data reconstruction,” Sci. Rep., vol. 10,
no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 3302.
[22] V. O. K. Li, J. C. K. Lam, and J. Cui, ”AI for social good: AI and Big
Data approaches for environmental decision-making,” Environ. Sci. Policy,
vol. 125, pp. 241–246, 2021.
[23] K. Han, A. Xiao, E. Wu, J. Guo, C. Xu, and Y. Wang, “Transformer in transformer,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021,
pp. 15908–15919.
[24] T. Wolf et al., “Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process.: Syst.
Demonstrations, 2020, pp. 38–45.
[25] L. Dong, S. Xu, and B. Xu, “Speech-transformer: A no-recurrence
sequence-to-sequence model for speech recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2018, pp. 5884–5888.
[26] K. Han et al., “A survey on vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 87–110, Jan. 2023.
[27] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 11106–11115.
[28] S. Karita et al., “A comparative study on transformer vs RNN in speech
applications,” in Proc. IEEE Autom. Speech Recognit. Understanding
Workshop, 2019, pp. 449–456.
[29] Y. Li et al., “Improved end-to-end speech emotion recognition using self
attention mechanism and multitask learning,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2019,
pp. 2803–2807.
[30] M. G. Kenward and J. Carpenter, “Multiple imputation: Current perspectives,” Statist. Methods Med. Res., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 199–218, 2007.
[31] P. A. Patrician, “Multiple imputation for missing data,” Res. Nurs. Health,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 76–84, 2002.
[32] S. Zhang, “Nearest neighbor selection for iteratively kNN imputation,” J.
Syst. Softw., vol. 85, no. 11, pp. 2541–2552, 2012.
[33] D. J. Stekhoven and P. Bühlmann, “MissForest—non-parametric missing
value imputation for mixed-type data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 112–118, 2012.
[34] J. Y. Zhu, Y. Zheng, X. Yi, and V. O. K. Li, “A Gaussian Bayesian model
to identify spatio-temporal causalities for air pollution based on urban
Big Data,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2016,
pp. 3–8.
[35] L. Gondara and K. Wang, “MIDA: Multiple imputation using denoising
autoencoders,” in Proc. Pacific-Asia Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
Melbourne, Australia, 2018, pp. 260–272.
[36] L. Gondara and K. Wang, “Recovering loss to followup information using
denoising autoencoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, Boston, USA,
2017, pp. 1936–1945.
[37] Y. Yu, V. O. K. Li, and J. C. K. Lam, “Missing air pollution data recovery
based on long-short term context encoder,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 711–722, Jun. 2022.
[38] D. B. Rubin, Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. Hoboken,
NJ, USA: Wiley, 2004 .
[39] N. Schenker, “Multiple imputation for interval estimation from surveys with ignorable nonresponse,” Ph.D. dissertation, The University of
Chicago, 1985.
[40] R. J. Little and D. B. Rubin, Statistical Analysis With Missing Data.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2019.
[41] D. Pathak, P. Krahenbuhl, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and A. A. Efros, “Context
encoders: Feature learning by inpainting,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Las Vegas, USA, 2016, pp. 2536–2544.
[42] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks
for semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Boston, USA, 2015, pp. 3431–3440.
[43] V. O. K. Li, J. C. K. Lam, Y. Han, and K. Chow, “A Big Data and artificial
intelligence framework for smart and personalized air pollution monitoring
and health management in Hong Kong,” Environ. Sci. Policy, vol. 124,
pp. 441–450, 2021.
[44] I. Spinelli, S. Scardapane, and A. Uncini, “Missing data imputation
with adversarially-trained graph convolutional networks,” Neural Netw.,
vol. 129, pp. 249–260, 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YU et al.: CTDI: CNN-TRANSFORMER-BASED SPATIAL-TEMPORAL MISSING AIR POLLUTION DATA IMPUTATION

[45] G. Murugan, V. Moyal, P. Nandankar, O. Pandithurai, and E. S. J. Pimo,
“A novel CNN method for the accurate spatial data recovery from digital
images,” in Mater. Today: Proc., vol. 80, pp. 1706–1712, 2023.
[46] Y.-J. Kim and M. Chi, “Temporal belief memory: Imputing missing data
during RNN training,” in Proc. 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018,
pp. 2326–2332.
[47] J. Ma, J. C. Cheng, F. Jiang, W. Chen, M. Wang, and C. Zhai, “A bidirectional missing data imputation scheme based on LSTM and transfer
learning for building energy data,” Energy Buildings, vol. 216, Jun. 2020,
Art. no. 109941.
[48] Y. Eum and E.-H. Yoo, “Imputation of missing time-activity data with longterm gaps: A multi-scale residual CNN-LSTM network model,” Comput.,
Environ. Urban Syst., vol. 95, 2022, Art. no. 101823.
[49] S. N. Hussain, A. Abd Aziz, M. J. Hossen, N. A. Ab Aziz, G. R.
Murthy, and F. B. Mustakim, “A novel framework based on CNNLSTM neural network for prediction of missing values in electricity
consumption time-series datasets,” J. Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 115–129, 2022.
[50] Z. Li, F. Liu, W. Yang, S. Peng, and J. Zhou, ”A survey of convolutional neural networks: analysis, applications, and prospects,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 6999–7019,
Dec. 2022.
[51] W. Rawat and Z. Wang, “Deep convolutional neural networks for image
classification: A comprehensive review,” Neural Comput., vol. 29, no. 9,
pp. 2352–2449, 2017.
[52] A. Dhillon and G. K. Verma, “Convolutional neural network: A review of
models, methodologies and applications to object detection,” Prog. Artif.
Intell., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 85–112, 2020.
[53] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, “V-Net: Fully convolutional
neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation,” in Proc.
IEEE 4th Int. Conf. 3D Vis., 2016, pp. 565–571.
[54] S. Siami-Namini, N. Tavakoli, and A. S. Namin, “A comparison of ARIMA
and LSTM in forecasting time series,” in Proc. 17th IEEE Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. Appl., 2018, pp. 1394–1401.
[55] Y. Zhang, Q. Liu, and L. Song, “Sentence-state LSTM for text representation,” 2018, arXiv: 1805.02474.
[56] A. Graves, N. Jaitly, and A.-R. Mohamed, “Hybrid speech recognition
with deep bidirectional LSTM,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Autom. Speech
Recognit. Understanding., 2013, pp. 273–278.
[57] Y. Yu, X. Si, C. Hu, and J. Zhang, “A review of recurrent neural networks:
LSTM cells and network architectures,” Neural Comput., vol. 31, no. 7,
pp. 1235–1270, 2019.
[58] Y. Han, J. C. K. Lam, V. O. K. Li, and D. Reiner, “A Bayesian LSTM
model to evaluate the effects of air pollution control regulations in Beijing,
China,” Environ. Sci. Policy, vol. 115, pp. 26–34, 2021.
[59] R. Dey and F. M. Salem, “Gate-variants of gated recurrent unit (GRU)
neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 60th Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Systems.,
2017, pp. 1597–1600.
[60] R. Fu, Z. Zhang, and L. Li, “Using LSTM and GRU neural network
methods for traffic flow prediction,” in Proc. 31st Youth Academic Annu.
Conf. Chin. Assoc. Automat., 2016, pp. 324–328.
[61] V. O. K. Li, J. C. K. Lam, Y. Chen, and J. Gu, “Deep learning model to
estimate air pollution using M-BP to fill in missing proxy urban data,” in
Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2017, pp. 1–6.
[62] C.-J. Huang and P.-H. Kuo, “A deep CNN-LSTM model for particulate
matter (PM2.5 ) forecasting in smart cities,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 7, 2018,
Art. no. 2220.
[63] I. E. Livieris, E. Pintelas, and P. Pintelas, “A CNN–LSTM model for gold
price time-series forecasting,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 32, pp. 17351–
17360, 2020.
[64] R. Yan, J. Liao, J. Yang, W. Sun, M. Nong, and F. Li, “Multi-hour and multisite air quality index forecasting in Beijing using CNN, LSTM, CNNLSTM, and spatiotemporal clustering,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 169, 2021,
Art. no. 114513.
[65] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Info.
Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[66] C. Subakan, M. Ravanelli, S. Cornell, M. Bronzi, and J. Zhong, “Attention
is all you need in speech separation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech Signal Process., 2021, pp. 21–25.
[67] P. Shaw, J. Uszkoreit, and A. Vaswani, “Self-attention with relative position representations,” 2018, arXiv: 1803.02155.
[68] E. Voita, D. Talbot, F. Moiseev, R. Sennrich, and I. Titov, “Analyzing
multi-head self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the rest
can be pruned,” 2019, arXiv:1905.09418.

2455

[69] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
arXiv:1810.04805.
[70] L. Floridi and M. Chiriatti, “GPT-3: Its nature, scope, limits, and consequences,” Minds Machines, vol. 30, pp. 681–694, 2020.
[71] C. Raffel et al., “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1,
pp. 5485–5551, 2020.
[72] M. Xu et al., “Spatial-temporal transformer networks for traffic flow
forecasting,” 2020, arXiv:2001.02908.
[73] W. Zhang, P. Zhang, Y. Yu, X. Li, S. A. Biancardo, and J. Zhang, “Missing
data repairs for traffic flow with self-attention generative adversarial imputation net,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7919–7930,
Jul. 2021.
[74] Q. Zeng, L. Wang, S. Zhu, Y. Gao, X. Qiu, and L. Chen, “Long-term PM2.5
concentrations forecasting using CEEMDAN and deep Transformer neural
network,” Atmospheric Pollut. Res., vol. 14, no. 9, 2023, Art. no. 101839.
[75] G. Y. Lu and D. W. Wong, “An adaptive inverse-distance weighting spatial
interpolation technique,” Comput. Geosci., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 1044–1055,
2008.
[76] G. Lefebvre, S. Berlemont, F. Mamalet, and C. Garcia, “BLSTM-RNN
based 3D gesture classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw.,
Sofia, Bulgaria, Springer, 2013, pp. 381–388.
[77] J. T. Springenberg, A. Dosovitskiy, T. Brox, and M. Riedmiller, “Striving
for simplicity: The all convolutional net,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6806.
[78] Y. Han, Q. Zhang, V. O. K. Li, and J. C. K. Lam, “Deep-air: A hybrid
CNN-LSTM framework for air quality modeling in metropolitan cities,”
Mar. 2021, arXiv:2103.14587.
[79] W. Du, D. Côté, and Y. Liu, “SAITS: Self-attention-based imputation for
time series,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 219, 2023, Art. no. 119619.
[80] Air pollution data from the EPD of HKSAR database. Accessed:
Aug. 31, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://cd.epic.epd.gov.hk/EPICDI/
air/station/
[81] Hong KongObservatory Open Database. Accessed: Aug. 31, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.hko.gov.hk/en/abouthko/opendata_intro.
htm
[82] Hong KongTraffic Speed Map. Accessed: Aug. 31, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://data.gov.hk/en-data/dataset/hk-ogcio-da_div_02-citydashboard-traffic-speed
[83] S. Thirukumaran and A. Sumathi, “Missing value imputation techniques
depth survey and an imputation algorithm to improve the efficiency of
imputation,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Comput., Chennai, India,
2012, pp. 1–5.
[84] I. R. White, P. Royston, and A. M. Wood, “Multiple imputation using
chained equations: Issues and guidance for practice,” Statist. Med., vol. 30,
no. 4, pp. 377–399, 2011.
[85] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[86] J. Benesty, J. Chen, Y. Huang, and I. Cohen, “Pearson correlation coefficient,” in Noise Reduction in Speech Processing. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2009, pp. 1–4.

Yangwen Yu received the BEng degree in communication engineering (Science experimental class)
and the MEng degree in telecommunication & information system from Beijing Jiaotong University,
Beijing, China, in 2013 and 2016, respectively, and
the PhD degree from the Department of Electrical &
Electronic Engineering, University of Hong Kong in
2022. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow under the
supervision of Prof. Victor O.K. Li and Dr. Jacqueline
C.K. Lam. Her research interests include information
theory, coding and modulation, and temporally and
spatially correlated missing data recovery.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2456

Victor O. K. Li (Fellow, IEEE) received the SB,
SM, EE, and ScD degrees in electrical engineering
and computer science from MIT. He is a chair of information engineering and Cheng Yu-Tung professor
in sustainable development with the Department of
Electrical & Electronic Engineering (EEE) University
of Hong Kong. He was a visiting professor with the
Department of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Cambridge, U.K., from April to August
2019. He is the director of the HKU-Cambridge Clean
Energy and Environment Research Platform, and of
the HKU-Cambridge AI to Advance Well-being and Society Research Platform,
which are interdisciplinary collaborations with Cambridge University. He was
the head of EEE, assoc. dean (Research) of Engineering and Managing Director
of Versitech Ltd. He serves on the board of Sunevision Holdings Ltd., listed on
the Hong Kong Stock Exchange and co-founded Fano Labs Ltd., an artificial
intelligence (AI) company with his PhD student. Previously, he was a professor
of electrical engineering with the University of Southern California (USC), Los
Angeles, California, USA, and a director with the USC Communication Sciences
Institute. His research interests include Big Data, AI, optimization techniques,
and interdisciplinary clean energy and environment studies. In Jan 2018, he was
awarded a USD 6.3 M RGC Theme-based Research Project to develop deep
learning techniques for personalized and smart air pollution monitoring and
health management. Sought by government, industry, and academic organizations, he has lectured and consulted extensively internationally. He has received
numerous awards, including the PRC Ministry of Education Changjiang Chair
Professorship at Tsinghua University, the U.K. Royal Academy of Engineering
Senior Visiting Fellowship in Communications, the Croucher Foundation Senior
Research Fellowship, and the Order of the Bronze Bauhinia Star, Government
of the HKSAR. He is a fellow of the Hong Kong Academy of Engineering
Sciences, the IAE, and the HKIE.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Kelvin Chan received the bachelor of science degree
in economics from the University of Cambridge, and
the MBA degree from the London School of Economics. He is a senior research project officer with the
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
the University of Hong Kong. He has a strong background and experience in accounting and technology
entrepreneurship.

Qi Zhang received the BE degree in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in
2017. He is currently working toward the PhD degree
with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong. His research
interests include deep-learning and its applications on
air pollution, spatio-temporal data analysis, and urban
computing.

Jacqueline C. K. Lam is a associate professor with
the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Hong Kong, also co-director
with the HKU AI to Advance Well-being and Society Institute, which embeds the HKU-Cambridge
Clean Energy and Environment Research Platform,
and the HKU-Cambridge AI to Advance Well-being
and Society Research Platform. She was the Hughes
Hall visiting fellow, before she takes up visiting senior
research fellow and associate researcher with Energy
Policy Research Group, Judge Business School, the
University of Cambridge. She is currently based in CEEPR, MIT, as a visiting
scholar. Her research studies clean energy and environment using interdisciplinary approaches, with a special focus on China and the U.K. Her recent
research focuses on the use of Big Data and machine learning techniques to
study personalized air pollution monitoring and health management. Her work is
published in IEEE, Environment International, Applied Energy, Environmental
Science and Policy, and Energy Policy. Jacqueline has received three times the
research grants awarded by the Research Grants Council, HKSAR Government,
from 2011-2017. The funded amount totaled USD 7.8 M in PI or Co-PI capacity.
Her recent research study, in joint collaboration with Yang Han and Victor OK
Li on PM2.5 pollution and environmental inequality in Hong Kong, has been
published in Environmental Science and Policy, and widely covered by more
than 30 local and overseas newspapers and TVs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Patna. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 08:38:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

